## Conclusion

Probabilistic methods give us the ability to perform calculations faster
and with fewer resources than previously possible. As large-volume data
streams become more ubiquitous, being able to do complex calculations
quickly will become increasingly important. With data collection rates
continuing to increase, the calculation methods we are currently
comfortable with will begin to require overwhelming computational
resources. These techniques also open up new potential analysis and
product opportunities.

In this report weâ€™ve explored the methods and advances in the field of
probabilistic algorithms in order to outline how powerful these
algorithms are and how critical they will be in shaping the future of
computing. We explained probabilistic algorithms, gave historical
context, and provided examples of many common applications which can
easily be shaped by these methods, including realtime trend analysis on
social networks (as illustrated by our prototype, CliqueStream) and
anomaly detection in security.

With the prototype we show the simplification of a complex problem with
probabilistic methods. While it was once simply unfeasible to do a
similarity graph with the massive dataset containing every word used on
Reddit and Twitter, probabilistic algorithms make it possible to do the
calculations in realtime using modest computers. In fact, the initial
view of the prototype performs a probabilistic calculation in seconds,
while it would have taken over 15 minutes to do the equivalent
calculation with classical deterministic algorithms. This is a simple
demonstration of the power of this approach to working with realtime
data.

In addition to allowing us to do classical computations on smaller
hardware, the computational edge afforded by probabilistic methods will
allow us to change the ways which users interact with algorithms. Since
calculations can be done on commodity hardware, even on cell phones, we
can bring the algorithms to users and help them get the insights they
need immediately and without being tied to a cumbersome cloud
architecture. This not only saves on the computational requirements
needed for a given service, affords users the privacy that they desire,
and opens up new opportunities to create businesses and services that
push computation onto the devices themselves.

![Probabilistic methods will allow personal devices to be less reliant
on cloud architecture](figures/30.svg)

##### Figure 1. Probabilistic methods will allow personal devices to be less reliant on cloud architecture

We remain excited about these types of probabilistic systems. There are
many applications where these methods can be plugged in today with
immediate returns, and even more where they enable novel architectures,
allowing for new types of applications. Understanding these methods will
unlock new possible insights, turn decision making into a quicker and
more data-driven process, and enable new kinds of products to be built.

------------------------------------------------------------------------